# Final Project: Large Counties - Did they all vote for Biden? 
## Overview
In the 2020 election, as well as in most recent elections, large cities in the USA overwhelmingly have voted for the Democrat candidate. 
Looking at an election map usually shows a largely red map, with the occasional blue dots in the large cities. However, as with all data, there is still a lot of
variation to be explained. Many studies of course already analyzed the relationship between socioeconomic-status, education, ethnicity, etc., and voting behavior. 
With foursquare, we have the opportunity of a totally different kind of analysis. Instead of analyzing the impact of population characteristics on voting behavior,
we can explore if voting behavior is related to the kinds of venues different areas are made up of. We are going to use the Foursquare API to collect information
on venues within the large counties. We are going to cluster the counties by their venues and use machine learning to predict how those counties voted in the 2020 
presidential election.
## Background and Problem Description
When watching the election coverage in the year 2020, there were quite a few very interesting facts about voting behavior to observe. Besides the obvious red states and blue states which stay the same every election cycle with only small variations, we could see again the large difference between rural areas and metropolitan areas - the rural areas overwhelmingly voting for Trump and the metropolitan areas overwhelmingly voting for Biden. Because vote count reporting does not happen all at once or consistently distributed over the country, but actually happens in large chunks at a time, we observed very dramatical changes throughout election night and the week afterward. For example, Biden started with a large lead in the state of Texas early election night, which shocked many Trump-voters. When we looked at the counties that reported results, we could see that the lead was due to the fact that almost only Dallas - a large city - was reporting results. Later Texas went to Trump quite clearly. A similar thing happened in the state of Ohio - a must-win for Trump - where Biden had a lead for a long period of time before the rural areas were reporting the results and Trump again won quite considerably. The most dramatic shifts happened in the night from December 3rd to December 4th. Trump went into the night with massive leads in Pennsylvenia and Michigan, and a considerable lead in Wisconsin and already declared himself winner, only to lose those states after large amounts of absentee ballots in the largest cities like Philadelphia, Detroit and Milwaukee were counted. <br>
In my analysis, I want to focus more deeply on the voting behavior in the large counties. As stated above, those are overwhelmingly democrat counties. The question to be answered is this: <b> Are there any features in the make-up of cities when it comes to their venues, which can predict how many voters voted for Joe Biden and how many voted for Donald Trump above and beyond demographic variables like socio-economic status, education or ethnicity composition? </b> I want to understand more deeply what kind of cities favored Joe Biden and what kind of cities tilted a bit more to Donal Trump. <br>
<b> Who could be interested in this research? </b> There is a famous Netflix Documentary called "The Great Hack", which depicts the succesfull efforts by Cambrige Analytica to apply data science to influence the 2016 presidential elections. Cambrige Analytica was hired by the Trump-campaign to help them optimize their campaign strategy for optimal targeting of voters. They primarily focused on individual voter variables, to targed those populations which could successfully be persuaded. As we can recognize from this fact, the candidates and political parties themselves could be stakeholders in our project. Elections are often very close races and getting the extra-edge can put a candidate on top in the end. To be more specific, the Republican Party might be very interested in understanding more thoroghly why they are so unsucessfull in metropolitan areas. A better understanding of the features within cities could help them understand their potential voters so they could adapt their messege and campaign strategies to adress this particular difficult audience. 

## Data
We will need four types of data for our analysis. <ul><li> <First we need a list of all the counties in the USA with their respective populations. We are going to use the [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_United_States_counties_and_county_equivalents) page on "List of United States counties and county equivalents". The main table gives us all counties with their respective population estimate. Depending on the computational requirements, we are going to use a subset of those counties. There are 45 counties with a population above 1 Million and 89 counties with a population above 500 Thousand. We are at least going to use those 89 counties for our analysis. If resources permit, we are going to extend our analysis to smaller counties.</li>
<li> Second, we need the election-results of the 2020 presidential election per county. [NBC-news](https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2020-elections/president-results) offers us the estimated results of all counties in the USA. The data shows us the percentages and total vote counts for former Vice-President Joe Biden, President Donald Trump, and the candidate of the Libertarian Party Joe Jorgensen. For our analysis, we are only going to use the data on Biden and Trump, and ignore third-party candidates, since their vote-counts are very small and would only complicate our analysis. Our dependent variable will numerical, so we are going to apply regression analyses to predict the votes. </li>
<li> Third, we are going to use the Foursquare-API to get search for venues within the counties. More specifically, we are going to count the venue-categories within each county we use for our analysis so that for each county we have the composition of venue-categories in percent. We are not interested in the total number of venues with a certain category because this number would largely depend on the size of the county, but in the proportion of a category among all venues within the county. We are then going to use the proportions of venue-categories as predictors wihtin our machine-learning algorithm. </li>
<li> Lastly, we are going to include some additional demographic variables. We can find data on household income and education in all counties on the [website of the Economic Research Service of the Department of Agriculture](https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/county-level-data-sets/). County-level data on ethnicity and gender can be found on the website of the [United States Census Bureau](https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/popest/2010s-counties-detail.html). We are going to incorporate this data as predictors for our model. We want to test if venue-composition can predict voting-behavior above and beyond demographic data.
  <ul>
